# Services guidelines

## Service tiers

Tiers give us a way to split services up into easily understood buckets:

* For each tier, a set of targets must be met (these targets have been developed by looking at the kind of usage scenarios that are commonly encountered).
* It sets quality standards that should be maintained throughout the entire service life in production.
* Tiers also allow other service owners to understand how and why a service was built so that they can easily decide whether or not it would be appropriate to use as a dependency somewhere else.

Three tiers are defined for products and customer-facing services, business systems and internal tools (Tiers 1, 2 and 3). An underlying "Tier-0" provides an even higher availability standard for the critical components that everything else relies on.

### Tier 0

Supporting Infrastructure and shared service components that operations rely on to be able to run and provide the services. Components are considered critical if one of the following is true:

* They are required for a Tier-1 service to run or be accessed by its users
* They are required by staff to support or perform key operational functions on a Tier-1 service
* Start / Stop / Restart the service
* Perform a deployment, upgrade, roll-back/ hot-fix
* Determine the current state (up/down/degraded)

### Tier 1

A Standard service directly providing a vital business, customer or product function (i.e. our products, customer facing services or business-critical internal services). When the service is degraded or unavailable, the company is unable to perform critical business functions (selling and supporting software), and/or core functionality from a customer perspective is lost.

This class of service requires a 24/7 support roster, has high SLAs for key metrics, and a stringent set of requirements laid out in the Architecture Group and Operational Readiness checklists.

### Tier 2

A production customer-facing service (or component of another Tier-1 or Tier-2 service) which is not considered part of the core functionality of that service. These are services that provide added value or additional user experience which might be considered optional or "nice-to-have".

OR

As service used by teams to perform aspects of their roles (collaboration tools, issue tracking, etc).

This class of service may or may not require a 24/7 support roster, has lower SLAs, and fewer go-live requirements on the Operational Readiness checklist.

### Tier 3

Internal only to the company or Experimental/public beta service. This class may also include services that are currently an experimental feature for early adopters, where an expectation has been set that the quality of the service may degrade while we are working on it.

This level provides a "Low SLA" bucket for services that are supported by best-efforts only.

### Comparison of tiers targets

|                          | Metric unit                    |              Tier 0               |              Tier 1              | Tier 2                           | Tier 3                         |
|:-------------------------|:-------------------------------|:---------------------------------:|:--------------------------------:|----------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Availability(1):         | Uptime (%)                     |              99.99%               |              99.95%              | 99.9%                            | 99%                            |
|                          |                                |    (up to 1 min/week downtime)    |   (up to 5 min/week downtime)    | (up to 10 min/week downtime)     | (up to 1h40 min/week downtime) |
| Reliability:             | Success rate (%)               |              99.99%               |              99.95%              | 99.9%                            | 99%                            |
|                          |                                | (up to 1 in 10,000 requests fail) | (up to 1 in 2,000 requests fail) | (up to 1 in 1,000 requests fail) | (up to 1 in 100 requests fail) |
| Data loss (2):           | Recovery Point Objective (RPO) |         less than 1 hour          |         less than 1 hour         | less than 8 hours                | less than 24 hours             |
| Service restauration(2): | Recovery Time Objective (RTO)  |         less than 4 hours         |        less than 6 hours         | less  than 24 hours              | less than 72 hours             |
| Support:                 | Time in year                   |             24/7/265              |             24/7/265             | 24/5                             | Regular business hours         |

* _(1): Availability should be aggregated over a monthly time period with rolling 30 day average._
* _(2): in the event of a disaster_

## Launching a service

Here's a checklist for launching a successful service that will meet all its targets:

| Item                    |     Tier     | Comment                                                                                                                |
|-------------------------|:------------:|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1. Backups              |  All Tiers   | as per environments, regions and backup strategy, confirm that this meets expectations and test your backups           |
| 2. Logging              |  All Tiers   | see **Logging guidelines** (below)                                                                                     |
| 3. Metrics              |  All Tiers   | see **Observability page** for more details                                                                            |
| 3. Go-live plan         |  All Tiers   | see **Service Launch and Change Plan Template** (below)                                                                |
| 4. Resilience           | Up to Tier-2 | Decide how your service needs to survive AZ / Region failure                                                           |
| 5. Deployment           | Up to Tier-2 | Set up zero downtime deployment and semantic checks                                                                    |
| 6. Incident training    | Up to Tier-2 | Attend incident training with SRE team                                                                                 |
| 7. 24x7 support         | Up to Tier-2 | Walk through how to activate the on-call policy for your team                                                          |
| 8. Security             |  All tiers   | Generate new certificate via Amazon Certificate, implement appropriate authentication as part of building your service |
| 9. Capacity management  | Up to Tier-2 | Define rate limiting, average response time and other limits                                                           |
| 10. 3rd Party Standards |  All tiers   | ensure all third parties Are following the company procurement and legal policies                                      |

## Service Launch and Change Plan Template

### I'm launching a service

| Go-live Scheduled | <date>                                                 |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Approver          | person owning the initial service rollout              |
| Informed          | group of people need to know about the service rollout |
| References        | link any relevant pages here                           |

### I'm making a change to my service

| Go-live Scheduled | <date>                                                                  |
|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Approver          | person leader of the change and knows the most about what is happening. |
| Informed          | group of people need to know about the change                           |
| References        | link any relevant pages here                                            |

### Pre-requisites

Prior to rolling out a change, or launching a new service, take the opportunity to ensure that any dependencies required are in place.
For example, have you ensured that all the Credo items have been completed?  Are your backups in place?  Do teams know this is happening?

### Go-Live Plan

When the change is ready to go out the, you should understand how this is going to happen.  Be explicit!  The intent here is that somebody who does not have all the context that you have should be able to understand what needs to take place.

### Go-Live Postponed Plan

If go-live is postponed after <<GO LIVE DATE>> we will need to complete the following tasks to ensure that the all our dependencies know about this and we don't accidentally run off the edge of the cliff!

### Test plan

Now that the change you've intended to make is live, how will you specifically validate that is worked as expected?
What will you test to check this?  Which dashboards and monitoring will you use?

### Rollback Plan

All your carefully planned work is now rolled out. Sadly though, its now 2 days after the change and its 2am. Something has gone wrong and one of your peers needs to understand how to roll back this change.

Remember - they're half asleep and they were not involved in the rollout. What do they need to do to revert this change? Are there any tasks they need to make sure to do in order to prevent further breakage (e.g. other feature flag flips).

## Logging guidelines

Logs of all microservices, for both _stdout_ and _stderr_, are shipped off to a logging service, for instance Splunk. Under normal circumstances, at least the last 13 days of log data are kept in each environment for each service.

Logging contents should adhere to the standard, particularly in regards to UGC/PII.

### Don't log Customer Content

We must not log passwords, credentials, or access tokens.
We must not log **User Generated Content** (including **PII**).

Exceptions:
Restricted data (UGC and PII) may only be logged in support of the following:

* ensuring network and information security
* indicating possible criminal acts or threats to public security
* processing employee data
* fraud prevention
* Legitimate business need
  * Sometimes we absolutely must log something that contains UGC and/or PII.
  * Please see the Guideline - Dealing With Personally Identifiable Information for details on how this works.
  * Logging Personal Data (PD) or Personally Identifiable Information (PII) is allowed under legitimate business need.

### Log the information we need

* Log events must contain sufficient, relevant information.
* Log events must be well-formatted

Consider the use cases of your log event. Ensure that you provide the required data; if anyone else will ever use your logs you should provide the recommended data as well. You may also find that you need to log more or different data to the provided list. If you find new data that all our applications should be recording, please request an update to this and/or supporting documents.

### Ensure proper event coverage

Logs must cover appropriate events. Here's a list of events to consider:

* data modification, extraction,
* errors & exceptions,
* authentication & autorization,
* performance metrics,
* application state,
* network activity,
* inter-system communication,
* ...

### Ensure timeliness and reliability

Logs **must** be delivered to the logging pipeline within 60 minutes of generation.
Logs **should** be delivered to the logging pipeline in near real-time.
Logs **should** be delivered to Atlassian's logging pipeline with zero log events lost.

Ideally, 100% of log events are in the logging pipeline in near-realtime. If they can't be delivered in realtime, logs should be aggregated securely and redundantly.

### Enforce the principle of least privilege

Logs must only be accessible to those who need them to do their jobs.
Logs containing encrypted confidential data must only be accessible to a well-controlled list of people subject to audit.

### Roles and Responsibilities

#### Security Team's Responsibilities

* Security must keep this document up to date and responsive to changes in our environment.
* Security must respond in a timely manner to queries about how to apply this standard.

#### Service Owner's Responsibilities

* Service owners must ensure that ACLs for their service's logs are minimal and up to date if they contain sensitive information.
* Service owners must ensure that UGC-tainted fields are correctly marked in the logging pipeline.

#### Developers' Responsibilities

* Developers must ensure their applications meet this standard.
* Developers must audit their logs to ensure they are not accidentally logging UGC.
* Developers should talk to Security if they have any questions or concerns about this policy.

#### Third Party Service Owners' Responsibilities

* Third parties should comply with this standard to the extent it is possible.
* Third party service owner must arrange for their logs to be on-boarded into the company logging pipeline.
* Third party service owner should consult with Security to create appropriate monitoring and alerts.
