# OAuth 2.0 Flow

OAuth was designed as an authorization protocol, so the end result of every OAuth flow is the app obtains an access token in order to be able to access or modify something about the user's account. The access token itself says nothing about who the user is.

## Authorization

Clients will direct a user's browser to the authorization server to begin the OAuth process. Clients may use either the authorization code grant type or the implicit grant. Along with the type of grant specified by the `response_type` parameter, the request will have a number of other parameters to indicate the specifics of the request.

### Request Parameters

The following parameters are used to begin the authorization request. For example, if the authorization server URL is `https://authorization-server.com/auth` then the client will craft a URL like the following and direct the user's browser to it:

```bash
https://authorization-server.com/auth?response_type=code
&client_id=29352735982374239857
&redirect_uri=https://example-app.com/callback
&scope=create+delete
&state=xcoivjuywkdkhvusuye3kch
```

| Request param |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|:--------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| response_type | `response_type` will be set to `code`, indicating that the application expects to receive an authorization code if successful.                                                                                                                               |
| client_id     | The `client_id` is the public identifier for the app.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| redirect_uri  | The `redirect_uri` is not required by the spec, but your service should require it. This URL must match one of the URLs the developer registered when creating the application, and the authorization server should reject the request if it does not match. |
| scope         | The request may have one or more scope values indicating additional access requested by the application. The authorization server will need to display the requested scopes to the user.                                                                     |
| state         | The `state` parameter is used by the application to store request-specific data and/or prevent CSRF attacks. The authorization server must return the unmodified state value back to the application.                                                        |

### Authorization Response

Once the user has finished logging in and approving the request, the authorization server is ready to redirect the user back to the application. If the request is valid and the user grants the authorization request, the authorization server generates an authorization code and redirects the user back to the application, adding the authorization code and the application's "state" value to the redirect URL.

The authorization code must expire shortly after it is issued. The OAuth 2.0 spec recommends a maximum lifetime of 10 minutes, but in practice, most services set the expiration much shorter, around 30-60 seconds. The authorization code itself can be of any length, but the length of the codes should be documented.

Because authorization codes are meant to be short-lived and single-use, you could implement them as self encoded tokens. With this technique, you can avoid storing authorization codes in a database, and instead, encode all of the necessary information into the authorization code itself. You can use either a built-in encryption library of your server-side environment, or a standard such as JSON Web Signature (JWS). However, since this authorization code is only meant to be used by the authorization server, it can often be simpler to implement them as short strings stored in a server-side cache that's accessible to the authorization endpoint and token endpoint.

In any case, the information that will need to be associated with the authorization code is the following.

| Param           |                                                                                                                                                                           |
|:----------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| client_id       | The client ID (or other client identifier) that requested this code                                                                                                       |
| redirect_uri    | The redirect URL that was used. This needs to be stored since the access token request must contain the same redirect URL for verification when issuing the access token. |
| User info       | Some way to identify the user that this authorization code is for, such as a user ID.                                                                                     |
| Expiration Date | The code needs to include an expiration date so that it only lasts a short time.                                                                                          |
| Unique ID       | The code needs its own unique ID of some sort in order to be able to check if the code has been used before. A database ID or a random string is sufficient.              |

Once you've generated the authorization code, either by creating a JWS-encoded string, or by generating a random string and storing the associated information in a database, you'll need to redirect the user to the application's redirect URL specified, providing `code` and `state` as described above.

### Implicit Grant Type Response

With the Implicit grant (`response_type=token`) the authorization server generates an access token immediately and redirects to the callback URL with the token and other access token attributes in the fragment.

For example, the authorization server redirects the user by sending the following HTTP response (extra line breaks for display purposes).

```curl
HTTP/1.1 302 Found
Location: https://example-app.com/redirect#access_token=MyMzFjNTk2NTk4ZTYyZGI3
 &state=dkZmYxMzE2
 &token_type=Bearer
 &expires_in=86400
```

You can see that this is much more dangerous than issuing a temporary one-time-use authorization code. Since there are many more ways an attacker can steal data out of an HTTP redirect compared to intercepting an HTTPS request, it's much riskier using this option compared to the authorization code flow.

From the authorization server's point of view, at the point it creates the access token and sends the HTTP redirect, it has no way of knowing whether or not the redirect was successful and the correct application has received the access token. It's kind of tossing the access token up into the air and crossing its fingers that the app catches it. This is in contrast to the authorization code method, where even though the authorization server can't guarantee the authorization code wasn't stolen, it can at least prevent a stolen authorization code from being useful by requiring a client secret or the PKCE code verifier. This provides a much greater level of security since the authorization server can now be more confident that it won't be giving access tokens away to attackers.

For these reasons as well as more documented in OAuth 2.0 for Browser-Based Apps, it is recommended that the Implicit flow no longer be used.

#### Error Response

There are two different kinds of errors to handle. The first kind of error is when the developer did something wrong when creating the authorization request. The other kind of error is when the user rejects the request (clicks the "Deny" button).

If there is something wrong with the syntax of the request, such as the redirect_uri or client_id is invalid, then it's important not to redirect the user and instead you should show the error message directly. This is to avoid letting your authorization server be used as an open redirector.

If the redirect_uri and client_id are both valid, but there is still some other problem, it's okay to redirect the user back to the redirect URI with the error in the query string.

When redirecting back to the application to indicate an error, the server adds the following parameters to the redirect URL:

| Error Code        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|:------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| error             | invalid_request, access_denied, unauthorized_client , unsupported_response_type, invalid_scope, server_error, temporarily_unavailable                                                                                         |
| error_description | human-readable description of the error                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| error_uri         | The server can also return a URL to a human-readable web page with information about the error. This is intended for the developer to get more information about the error, and is not meant to be displayed to the end user. |
| state             | If the request contained a state parameter, the error response must also include the exact value from the request. The client may use this to associate this response with the initial request.                               |

## Exchange

When the user is redirected back to our app, there will be a code and state parameter in the query string. The state parameter will be the same as the one we set in the initial authorization request, and is meant for our app to check that it matches before continuing. This helps our app avoid being tricked into sending an attacker's authorization code to GitHub, as well as prevents CSRF attacks.

```php
// When GitHub redirects the user back here,
// there will be a "code" and "state" parameter in the query string
if(isset($_GET['code'])) {
  // Verify the state matches our stored state
  if(!isset($_GET['state'])
    || $_SESSION['state'] != $_GET['state']) {
 
    header('Location: ' . $baseURL . '?error=invalid_state');
    die();
  }
 
  // Exchange the auth code for an access token
  $token = apiRequest($tokenURL, array(
    'grant_type' => 'authorization_code',
    'client_id' => $githubClientID,
    'client_secret' => $githubClientSecret,
    'redirect_uri' => $baseURL,
    'code' => $_GET['code']
  ));
  $_SESSION['access_token'] = $token['access_token'];
 
  header('Location: ' . $baseURL);
  die();
}
```

Here we are sending a request to GitHub's token endpoint to exchange the authorization code for an access token. The request contains our public client ID as well as the private client secret. We also send the same redirect URL as before along with the authorization code.

If everything checks out, GitHub generates an access token and returns it in the response. We store the access token in the session and redirect to the home page, and the user is logged in.

## Refresh Token

When you initially received the access token, it may have included a refresh token as well as an expiration time like in the example below.

```json
{
  "access_token": "AYjcyMzY3ZDhiNmJkNTY",
  "refresh_token": "RjY2NjM5NzA2OWJjuE7c",
  "token_type": "bearer",
  "expires": 3600
}
```

The presence of the refresh token means that the access token will expire and you'll be able to get a new one without the user's interaction.

The `expires_in` value is the number of seconds that the access token will be valid. It's up to the service you're using to decide how long access tokens will be valid, and may depend on the application or the organization's own policies. You could use this timestamp to preemptively refresh your access tokens instead of waiting for a request with an expired token to fail. Some people like to get a new access token shortly before the current one will expire in order to save an HTTP request of an API call failing. While that is a perfectly fine optimization, it doesn't stop you from still needing to handle the case where an API call fails if an access token expires before the expected time. Access tokens can expire for many reasons, such as the user revoking an app, or if the authorization server expires all tokens when a user changes their password.

If you make an API request and the token has expired already, you'll get back a response indicating as such. You can check for this specific error message, and then refresh the token and try the request again.

The most secure option is for the authorization server to issue a new refresh token each time one is used. This is the recommendation in the latest Security Best Current Practice which enables authorization servers to detect if a refresh token is stolen. This is especially important for clients that don't have a client secret, since the refresh token becomes the only thing needed to get new access tokens.

Keep in mind that at any point the user can revoke an application , so your application needs to be able to handle the case when using the refresh token also fails. At that point, you will need to prompt the user for authorization again, beginning a new OAuth flow from scratch.

## Revoke Token

There are a few reasons you might need to revoke an application's access to a user's account.

- The user explicitly wishes to revoke the application's access, such as if they've found an application they no longer want to use listed on their authorizations page
- The developer wants to revoke all user tokens for their application
- The developer deleted their application
- You as the service provider have determined an application is compromised or malicious, and want to disable it

Depending on how you've implemented generating access tokens, revoking them will work in different ways.

### Token Database

If you store access tokens in a database, then it is relatively easy to revoke all tokens that belong to a particular user. You can easily write a query that finds and deletes tokens belonging to the user, such as looking in the token table for their user_id. Assuming your resource server validates access tokens by looking them up in the database, then the next time the revoked client makes a request, their token will fail to validate.

### Self-Encoded Tokens

If you have a truly stateless mechanism of verifying tokens, and your resource server is validating tokens without sharing information with another system, then the only option is to wait for all outstanding tokens to expire, and prevent the application from being able to generate new tokens for that user by blocking any refresh token requests from that client ID. This is the primary reason to use extremely short-lived tokens when you are using self-encoded tokens.

If you can afford some level of statefulness, you could push a revocation list of token identifiers to your resource servers, and your resource servers can check that list when validating a token. The access token can contain a unique ID (e.g. the jti claim) which can be used to keep track of individual tokens. If you want to revoke a particular token, you would need to put that token's jti into a list somewhere that can be checked by your resource servers. Of course this means your resource servers are no longer doing a purely stateless check, so this may not be an option available for every situation.

You will also need to invalidate the application's refresh tokens that were issued along with an access token. Revoking the refresh token means the next time the application attempts to refresh the access token, the request for a new access token will be denied.
