# Remote work guidelines

## The Ground Rules

| Rule                      | Comment                                                                         |
|:--------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Working and Overlap Hours | - Define a primary timezone                                                     |
|                           | - at least 4h overlap                                                           |
|                           | - communicate about individual working hours                                    |
|                           | - communicate about preferred sheduled-meeting hours                            |
|                           | -communicate about "do not disturb" as Slack status                             |
| Remote Champion           | Elect a remote champion to facilicate processes                                 |
| Work Environment          | - working from a dedicated office place (avoid taking metting from noisy spots) |
|                           | - no face-to-face chats with coworkers if you meet in a physical office         |
|                           | - be fully present in a meeting (not going around, talking to others in home)   |
|                           | - have access to good headphone/microphone and internet                         |
|                           | - keep most work chats in public rooms                                          |
| Indicating time-off/away  | - give heads up on Slack when arriving/leaving "office"                         |
|                           | - use a shared calendar for all known events & days off                         |
|                           | - use Slack status to mention you're in a meeting                               |
| When to meet-in-person?   | About every quarter for a week                                                  |
| Other team rituals        | - have a "social" Slack channel                                                 |
|                           | - have walking 1:1s (use a smartphone and WhatsApp)                             |
|                           | - organise fortnighly 1:1 with Team Lead                                        |

## Feedback from Being Remote (= "things that worked well")

### Small team (~4 devs)

We found it very beneficial to be working in a small squad of 4 devs during the experiment. Being a small group, stand-ups and other meetings could be kept fast and efficient as everyone had the same context on what work needed to be done. The smaller team also promoted a good team culture, where everyone felt they had the opportunity to contribute and have their voice heard. We think this applies to non-remote team as well but might be even more important when being full-time remote.

### Remote Bootcamp

The remote experiment lined up with the DataDog to SignalFX migration work - our squad ended up taking on the majority of this work. To get the team up to speed with the SignalFX workflow we held a remote bootcamp where everyone had to dial in on the Zoom meeting, including those in the office.

Usually, when one person is remote and everyone is at the office, it becomes painful to hear every one in the meeting room for that person and it is also difficult for him to speak up. So, we went with all-remote bootcamp through Zoom. One person spoke at a time and everyone was able to ask questions.

The bootcamp’s success could be visibly measured as all the dashboards and the detectors were migrated within ~5 days of time as estimated.

### USE Together

[Use Together](https://www.use-together.com/) is a collaboration tool which allows multiple users to share the same desktop (and each user gets their own mouse!). Since our last remote experiment, Use Together has exited beta - and the software worked really well for us this time. Their support was great and they even implemented / simplified some features we requested. (For instance switching who’s hosting the session).

Another interesting tool, [Tuple](https://tuple.app/), is coming soon to the market as well. They are calling themselves “A Screenhero replacement” (worth mentioning that Slack [killed it for good](https://slack.com/intl/en-au/help/articles/360022908874)  ):  we didn’t get a chance to try it but it looks promising and we will definitely look into it next time.

### Ad-hoc Zoom meetings for morning standups & afternoon catch ups

Our morning standup was scheduled to be the same time every day. It was designed to be short and productive to get us jumpstarted into work for the day. A second optional meeting was also scheduled to discuss any issues we found during the day (and it was also a great chance to socialise as a team!). Zoom virtual backgrounds turned out to be an unassuming fun activity most days   . Like last time we also did lots of short ad-hoc Zoom meetings too when needed.

### Mural for sparing sessions

The NP team is working towards a better self-service architecture which implies a lot of sparring sessions. They are usually tricky to do remote, however we used Mural for those and it turned out to work really well. [Mural](https://mural.co/) is a great tool for collaborating on design ideas and mind mapping. We used Mural combined with zoom to work on how we would decompose NP responsibilities into micro services in an ideal world with no overhead for additional micro service.

### Project Learnings

#### Know the things you want to do beforehand

We did extensive pre-planning, requirements gathering and grooming sessions before we even wrote single line of code. This might be an obvious thing to do, but it feels like it becomes even more important in a remote context where you don’t know when you can get folks from other teams into one Zoom meeting again. The outcome was a nicely fleshed out, estimated backlog where all team members knew the details and could work independently straight away.

#### Do Pair Programming early

Internally we had 2 streams of implementation work in 2 different services so we split up in 2 dev pairs and rotated after 1 week. This not only instantly improved the shared knowledge about the technical decisions and architecture we implemented but also greatly reduced our PR waiting time. 

#### Over-Communicate

Inspired by [@Josh Devenny‘s excellent talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MkV2EpYhcm4) we tried to communicate every little thing that could be of importance to anybody else related to this project. In our dedicated project Slack channel everybody could get an instant overview of what is going on and we tried to update our PC ticket and project poster as detailed as possible.

We also found that the way you communicate on Slack was very important. Especially when working in different time zones we quickly realised that providing relevant context to your statements and questions in your chat messages was crucial.

E.g. instead of asking:

> Is it possible to enable the new ABC experience in staging?

You could ask:

> We finished the consumer work in our service XYZ and would like receive some data in staging to see if everything works. How can we enable the new ABC 
> experience in staging in your service?  

While this observation can probably be applied to all sorts of collaboration work, it is especially important when working remotely with different timezone. If the question was not clear enough you might have to wait another full working day for the information you were looking for.

## Useful tools for Remote People

### [Google Jamboard](https://jamboard.google.com/)

It’s a collaborative free drawing tool as if MS Paint and Synchrony had a child. We predominately use this on our own iPad (app store) with an Apple Pencil (but there’s also a web and Android version) to replace our whiteboarding rituals. So far, the experience has been pretty positive but here’s a few things we learned:

- Minimise the friction by having a long running Jamboard with a single go link. This way you can set and forget about permissions.

- The pencil is important - the experience works significantly better with it + the web version isn’t feature complete.

### [Use together](https://www.use-together.com/)

Use together is a paid ($10/mo) remote pair programming subscription that gives both users access to the host’s machine. It does a pretty neat job replicating the face-to-face pair programming experience and has a slight edge over:

- Screen sharing on Zoom because both parties can control input (to simulate keyboard and mouse sharing)

- Remote desktop because each participate gets their own cursor (to simulate pointing)

- Just make sure you close all the non-relevant windows before starting the session - it would be awkward to find someone rewriting the service’s in Golang.
