# Fast Five (quality as speed)

[See presentation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LcB5zmBmACY)

## TLDR: 

- There is no guarantee that a change to the database schema (or data) and a corresponding code change will be deployed at the same time. So there could be ‘new code’ written to expect ‘new schema’ but actually accessing ‘old schema’ a.k.a things are broken.

- To prevent this you need to write the ‘new code’ to be capable to detecting which version of the database it is accessing and be able to handle it correctly. i.e. the new code supports both versions.

- Now, deploy ‘new code’ everywhere before you roll out ‘new schema’.

- Once ‘new schema’ is rolled out everywhere you can roll out ‘new code v2’ which only supports ‘new schema’

- Old code and schema have now been completely replaced by the new versions in a safe way.

## Abstract

We've been on the Continuous Delivery train for a while, but we still have a way to go to ensure that our continuous delivery activities ensure customer data integrity, operational stability, and a pleasing user experience as a result of upgrades.

We also don't want the deployment of one component to interfere with the deployment of another (a form of "decoupling" or "connasence of deployment"), and we prefer to "roll forward" rather than "roll back", particularly as rolling back data changes is extremely problematic after users start using the system again. We're certainly getting better at that!

These needs all translate to the steps Engineering Services is taking to achieve the goal of quality at speed.

So what can we do to improve the sequence of actions of changing code, changing data, and deployment?

First, take a moment to refresh on some important concepts (linking to Martin Fowler's site, because much of the seminal work in this area occurred at ThoughtWorks):

- [Evolutionary Database Design](http://martinfowler.com/articles/evodb.html)

- [Continuous Delivery](http://martinfowler.com/books/continuousDelivery.html)

- [Branch by Abstraction](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/BranchByAbstraction.html)

- [Feature Toggle](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/FeatureToggle.html) (we have "dark features")

## Five Stages

| Stage      | Behaviour                                                                                                                     | Data Code                                                                                                                         | Data Schema / Values | Activation                            |
| ---------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
|  |
| 1          | Old                                                                                                                           | Old                                                                                                                               | Old                  | Deployment                            |
| 2          | Old                                                                                                                           | New and Old together                                                                                                              | Old                  | Deployment                            |
| 3          | Old                                                                                                                           | New and Old together - Behaviour branching decision based on a feature toggle or environmental context (usually request content). | New                  | Deployment or Configuration           |
| 4          | New and Old together (data code branching decision based on sensitivity to actual data values or schema, or a feature toggle) | New and Old together                                                                                                              | New                  | Deployment, Configuration, or Context |
| 5          | New                                                                                                                           | New                                                                                                                               | New                  | Deployment                            |

In the table, you see five stages. These don't all need to translate into separate deployments, but we do need at least three deployments. You will note that in each stage, only one of the layers of the functionality changes at a time. First the data-handling code, then the data itself, then the externally visible behaviour (like UI or REST resource).

In stage 1, the software is running as-is.

In stage 2, we deploy a version of the software that at least has code to handle data in the current and next state.

In stage 3, we update the data. It is more than likely the task to do that is part of the code deployed in stage 2. We just trigger that task at a suitable time. If you've read Database Refactoring, you'll know this can also be further staged for quality data transformation results over time. This allows us to not "leak" data changes all the way through to the "behaviour" layers.

During stages 2 and 3, we might prefer to use data-sensitive branching decisions (based on the format of a value like "user id" or the schema like a column's existence) so the code intrinsically understands how it needs to handle the data (a good practice for handling REST content too!), but we can use a flag or dynamically explicitly select an alternate data mapping (e.g. in Hibernate) to handle the old or new data format.

In stage 4, we alter the code that exhibits external behaviour, like the presentation or service layers. It is also quite likely this code was already present in the deployment at stage 2, but was "dark". We toggle the feature flag at an appropriate time, or use environmental context like the tenant name, region, environment name, username or group, A/B testing switch, or even a random session selection for gradual introduction of the behaviour to the population of users. We might even allow admins or users themselves to opt into the behaviour at their own pace so they can introduce change at times suitable to them.

In stage 5, the new functionality has been fully rolled out and all users are engaged with it. We can now delete the obsolete code in a deployment. Finalizing database refactorings (e.g. deleting columns that are no longer used) would be part of a subsequent cycle of this sequence.

## Conclusion

That all may seem cumbersome to some of you, but it is very easy to accomplish in a micro-service (the challenges in the monolithic product code bases are not unrecognized), especially if we are going through those stages all the time for new features – we'll be really used to it. Let's also reflect on the payoffs:

- Progressive changes introduced to users at a time that is suitable, not just because new code has been deployed
- Data changes ("upgrade tasks") that are introduced after the rest of the application / service can handle them
- Better able to understand the effects of a change without applying it to everyone simultaneously (reducing the surface area of incidents)
- Still with the same source code version of a component running in the environment (making debugging and problem management simpler)
