# Server-to-server authentication

How to implements server-to-server authentication for secure internal communications between microservices.

## Scope and goals

The primary goal is to allow the resource server to be confident that an incoming request comes from an authentic, identifiable client.

Other goals are:

- Performance: minimise the overhead of the protocol, especially the number of requests.
- Avoid secret distribution.

## Overview

An authentic request is defined as a request that has been generated by an identifiable client in a particular context within a given timeframe.

This protocol enables the resource server to decide the authenticity of an incoming request based on the information contained in an **access token** that is included with the request. The access token is:

- Self-issued by the client. The client does not need to collaborate with any other entity to generate the token.
- Signed to ensure its integrity.
- Verifiable. The resource server can verify the author of the token without collaborating with any other entity, assuming that it already has, or can discover, the public key of the client.
- A bearer token. A valid token is enough evidence to authenticate an incoming request. No proof-of-possession is required.

As a consequence of the properties above, if an access token is leaked, it cannot be revoked. To balance this weakness, access tokens are very specific so they cannot be used in different context, and they are short-lived.

```bash
+---------+                           +-----------------+                    +-----------------+
| Client  |                           | Resource_Server |                    | Key_Repository  |
+---------+                           +-----------------+                    +-----------------+
     |                                         |                                      |
     |                                         |                                      |
     | Issue signed access token               |                                      |
     |--------------------------               |                                      |
     |                         |               |                                      |
     |<-------------------------               |                                      |
     |                                         |                                      |
     |                                         |                                      |
     | Send request with access token          |                                      |
     |---------------------------------------->|                                      |
     |                                         |                                      |
     |                                         |                                      |
     |                                         | [unknown key]                        |
     |                                         |  Fetch key                           |
     |                                         |------------------------------------->|
     |                                         |                                      |
     |                                         |                                      |
     |                                         | Verify claims and signature          |
     |                                         |----------------------------          |
     |                                         |                           |          |
     |                                         |<---------------------------          |
     |                                         |                                      |
     |                                         |                                      |
     |                         return resource |                                      |
     |<----------------------------------------|                                      |
     |                                         |                                      |
```

The access token is a String that the client includes with each request that it makes to the resource provider.

The token format MUST be signed JWT. Tokens MUST be signed with the private key of the client using JWS.

The JOSE header (the first component of the JWT triple) MUST contain at least:

- “alg”: the algorithm used to sign the token. It MUST be one of the asymmetric key algorithms defined by JWA. It MUST NOT be ‘none’, and it MUST NOT be a symmetric key algorithm.
- “kid”: key identifier, as defined by JWS, with the difference that here it is mandatory. The key identifier MUST be a String that is a non-empty sequence of non-empty substrings joined with the forward slash character (“/”). None of the substrings can be “.” or “..”. As a further restriction, the key identifier must match the following Java regular expression: `^[\w.\-\+/]\*\$`.

The JOSE header MAY contain the “typ” header, but since JWS is being used, this header MUST be ignored.

The claims of the JWT token MUST contain:

- “iss”: issuer, as defined by JWT, with the difference that here it is mandatory and that the value must be a String (not a StringOrURI). This String identifies the service that issues the token. To eliminate the risk of collisions and ensure key discoverability, service identifiers MUST be registered (see Service Registration).
- “exp”: token expiry timestamp, as defined by JWT, with the difference that here it is mandatory.
- “iat”: issued at time, as defined by JWT, with the difference that here it is mandatory.
- “aud”: audience, as defined by JWT, with the difference that here it is mandatory. Note that the value of this claim may be a single string value or an array of string values.
- “jti”: token identifier, defined by JWT, with the difference that here it is mandatory.

The claims of the JWT token MAY contain:

- “sub”: subject, as defined by JWT. This String identifies the principal (service or individual). If absent, the receiver MUST assume that the token was self-issued and therefore the subject is the same as the issuer.
- “nbf”: not before, as defined by JWT.

### Access token generation

In this version, the access tokens are issued by the client, who assumes the role of the issuer and decides the subject. As an issuer, it owns one or more private keys.

To generate an access token, the issuer MUST follow the instructions defined by JWT and JWS and sign it with one of the private keys owned by the issuer. Since all resource servers MUST implement at least RS256 (as defined by JWA), the client SHOULD use RS256 to ensure interoperability with the resource server.

On top of those instructions, to generate the access token the issuer MUST, at least:

- Set the “iss” claim with the service identifier of the client.
- Set the “iat” claim to the current time according to its internal clock.
- Set the “exp” claim to a time in the future (“exp” MUST be after “iat”). For security reasons, the client SHOULD issue short-lived tokens. If the environment can guarantee a good synchronisation between the internal clocks of the systems involved in the communication, a sub-minute expire time is recommended. There is a hard limit of one hour.
- Set the “kid” header to the identifier of the key used to sign the token. The value of “kid” MUST be prefixed with the service identifier of the client and a “/” character.
- Set the “aud” claim to a value that identifies the resource server. The issuer and the resource server have to mutually agree on this identifier. The details of how they reach agreement are not covered in this version of the specification.
- Set the “jti” claim to a generated nonce value that is unique within the temporal window of the token life time. The client MUST ensure that there is a very low probability that at any point in time there are more than one valid and non-expired tokens with the same “jti” value, considering that there may be many issuers and many instances of the same issuer.

For a successful communication, the resource server needs to know the public key identified by “kid”. Therefore the client SHOULD make sure that the public key identified by “kid” is available in the key repository, see “Key discovery” below.

The client MAY reuse the same token for multiple HTTP requests to the resource server within the lifetime of the token except if the resource server explicitly documented that it enforces a token single use policy.

### Access token transportation

The client MUST include the access token with all the requests made to the resource server. Although RFC6750 defines multiple transportation methods, this specification only supports one of them: the “Authorization” HTTP header with the “Bearer” authentication scheme. That means that the “access_token” parameter in the request-body and the “access_token” query parameter in the URI are not supported.

The access token MUST be serialised using the JWS Compact Serialisation format, as defined by JWS.

### Access token verification

The resource server MUST decode and verify the signature of the access token using the public key of the issuer (“iss”) identified by “kid”.

Detailed instructions to decode and verify the access token are given by JWT and JWS. Resource servers MUST implement at least the RS256 algorithm (as defined by JWA), and they CAN implement other algorithms. Resource servers MUST reject tokens signed with an unsupported algorithm.

The resource server MUST ignore the following claims if they are present in the header of the access token:

- “jku”: as defined by JWS.
- “jwk”: as defined by JWS.
- “x5u”: as defined by JWS.
- “x5c”: as defined by JWS.
- “x5t”: as defined by JWS.
- “x5t#S256”: as defined by JWS.

The resource server needs the public key in order to verify the access token signature. Either the key it is known statically (by configuration) or it can be discovered at runtime (see Key discovery). The claimed key is identified by the “kid”. Invalid signatures, signatures made with an unknown key, and signatures made with a key different from the claimed one MUST be rejected. Unsigned access tokens MUST be rejected.

The resource server MUST check that the key identified by “kid” is owned by the issuer. In order to do so, the resource server MAY check if the “kid” string starts with “$iss/” (where $iss is the value of the “iss” claim) and, in affirmative case, accept that as proof of ownership of the key by the issuer. The resource server MAY use other mechanisms to the same effect.

If the “sub” claim is not defined, the resource server MUST assume that the effective subject is the same as the issuer.

The resource server MUST verify that it is the intended audience of the access token by checking that at least one of the values of “aud” is the identifier of the resource server mutually agreed by the client and the resource server. The details of how they reach agreement are not covered in this version of the specification.

The resource server MAY reject a token if the token nonce (“jti”) has been previously seen by the resource server in another request. If the resource server decides to implement duplicate detection, it MUST explicitly document that behaviour.

The resource server MUST verify that the current time is between “nbf” (optional) and “exp” (required), inclusive. For the purposes of this comparison, a missing “nbf” claim defaults to the value of “iat”. The resource server MAY offer, at its discretion, a grace period to compensate for internal clock divergences between the client and the resource server.

The resource server MUST reject a token if it lifespan (the difference between “exp” and “iat”) exceeds one hour (hard limit). A resource server MAY implement, at its discretion, a more restrictive upper bound for the lifespan of a token.

Besides the values of “kid”, “iss”, “sub”, “nbf”, “exp” and the signature, the resource server MUST NOT use any other claim or header as the basis to decide if the request is authentic.

If the resource server successfully verifies and accepts the access token, then it MUST process the request and it MUST assume that the request was issued by the issuer. If the resource server rejects the access token, then it MUST reply with a status code of 401 UNAUTHORIZED and MUST include a WWW-Authenticate header field as per the HTTP specification. If the resource server receives a request for a resource that is not available anonymously and the request does not include an access token, then it MUST reply with a status code of 401 UNAUTHORIZED and MUST include a WWW-Authenticate header field as per the HTTP specification.

The verification process described in this section allows the resource server to authenticate the token as a valid token issued by the owner of the private key. This process does not cover the following aspects that the resource server SHOULD implement by its own means:

- The resource server MAY decide if the verified issuer is authorised to communicate with the resource server.
- The resource server MAY decide if the verified issuer is authorised to make requests in relation to the claimed subject (principal).
- The resource server MAY decide if the combination of verified issuer and effective subject is authorised to make the requested business operation.

### Service registration

Services are univocally identified by a String, which MUST be a String with the same restrictions described above for the key identifier.

A centralised unique service registry MUST be maintained by an authority to avoid identifier clashes. The details of how to implement that are out of scope of this document.

Part of the service registration process MAY involve generating a priv/pub key pair and uploading the public key to the key repository to enable key discovery.

### Key discovery

When the resource server receives a request, it needs the public key to verify the signature of the access token. If the resource server does not know the public key of the claimed issuer, it MAY use the following key discovery process to obtain it.

The key discovery is performed by retrieving a resource in PEM format (RFC1422) from a key repository identified by a base URL. The base URL of the key repository MUST be statically known to the resource server. The relative URL path is a function of the key identifier (“kid”), as follows: `${baseurl}/${kid}`.

The key repository MAY be a web server that exposes the keys via unauthenticated HTTPS. In that case, the base URL MUST start with “https:”. The resource server MUST send a GET request and it SHOULD include an “Accept” header that expresses preference for the MIME type “application/x-pem-file”. It also MUST follow HTTP redirects. The key repository SHOULD serve the resource with “Content-Type: application/x-pem-file”. The resource server MAY use HTTP caching to store a cached copy of the public key. As per the HTTP caching protocol, failures to retrieve a key MUST NOT be cached.

Public keys published in the key repository NEVER change, but MAY be eventually removed. The resource server SHOULD NOT implement any other caching mechanism than HTTP caching, as it hinders the propagation of deletion of a compromised key.

The resource server trusts the keys obtained by following redirections from the original HTTP request. Therefore, key repositories MUST ensure that all the contents in the key repository or reachable by redirections from the key repository are trustworthy. For security reasons, a key repository SHOULD serve only static files and SHOULD avoid open redirections.

### References

- RFC1422: Privacy Enhancement for Internet Electronic Mail: Part II: Certificate-Based Key Management (February 1993): <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1422>
- RFC3986: Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax (January 2005): <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.txt>
- RFC6749: OAuth 2.0 (October 2012): <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749>
- RFC6750: The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework: Bearer Token Usage (October 2012): <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6750>
- RFC7230: Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Message Syntax and Routing:<https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230>
- RFC7235: Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Authentication: <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235>
- RFC7515: JSON Web Signature (JWS): <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7515>
- RFC7518: JSON Web Algorithms (JWA): <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7518>
- RFC7519: JSON Web Token (JWT): <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519>

## How it works in Micros (Atlassian)

Micros provides simple ASAP integration in the form of the Atlassian internal ASAP key repository, keypair provisioning, lifecycle management, and configuration injection for your service.

To enable ASAP, put this in your service descriptor at the top level:

```yaml
requiresAsap: true
```

### Key Features

- Support for services acting as client and/or server for ASAP requests.
- On deployment you will get a new keypair generated
  - Your service will get given a private key via an environment variable
  - The corresponding public key will be put in the public key repository (S3 bucket)
  - The URL of the public key repo will be injected in an environment variable.
- On subsequent deploys the new version of your service will get a new keypair
  - When the old stack is cleaned up (by default after 1 hour), its keypair will be revoked immediately

The Micros service will have environment variables matching the ones in Service to Service Authentication - RFC Environment Configuration. The ASAP libraries for different languages and the Instant Micros templates offer some support for these variables, and in some cases you don't have to worry about anything besides tuning the authorisation policies.

### ASAP Environments

Micros provides two ASAP environments (public key repos): staging and production. The staging environment includes everything that is not prod: micros staging + dev, dev laptops, and anything else that doesn't fit under production. Production is segregated so that only production services can talk to other production services.

Primary:

- https://asap-distribution.us-west-1.staging.paas-inf.net/
- https://asap-distribution.us-west-1.prod.paas-inf.net/

Secondary:

- https://asap-distribution.us-east-1.staging.paas-inf.net/
- https://asap-distribution.us-east-1.prod.paas-inf.net/

### Environment Variables

- **ASAP_KEY_ID**
  - The ASAP key ID, used for signing requests, the service verifying your request will look up this key ID in the public key repo. The format is <issuer>/<deploymentId>
  - Example: `micros/level2-lunch-bot/4sdfjkn4098fjds`
- **ASAP_ISSUER**
  - Can be used by ASAP servers to do authorization.
  - Example: `micros/level2-lunch-bot`
- **ASAP_PRIVATE_KEY**
  - Used to signed JWT requests.
  - Example: `data:application/pkcs8;kid=micros%2Flevel2-lunch-bot%2F4sdfjkn4098fjds;base64,<privatekeydata>`
- **ASAP_AUDIENCE**
  - The value that clients sending you requests should put in the "audience" field.
  - **Note:** this default audience value is different to your issuer. This may present a problem if you have clients which expect to call you back also using ASAP. They will not be able to call you back with the audience set to match the issuer extracted from your requests to them.
  - You can either: (a) customise the audience field in your ASAP authenticators to match your issuer (ie. prefix ASAP_AUDIENCE value with micros/, or (b) ensure that you explicitly inform the client in the request what audience you expect during callback (eg. via claims, or via request body).
  - Example: `dlevel2-lunch-bot`
- **ASAP_AUDIENCE**
  - The value that clients sending you requests should put in the "audience" field.
  - Example: `dlevel2-lunch-bot`
- **ASAP_PUBLIC_KEY_REPOSITORY_URL**
  - The direct URL to the public key repository.
  - Example: `https://asap-distribution.us-west-1.prod.paas-inf.net`
- **ASAP_PUBLIC_KEY_FALLBACK_REPOSITORY_URL**
  - The direct URL to the backup public key repository.
  - Example: `https://asap-distribution.us-east-1.prod.paas-inf.net`
- **ASAP_GROUP_ISSUER**
  - Issuer that represent an ASAP group. All services in a ASAP group will have same ASAP_GROUP_ISSUER.
  - Example: `micros-group/myasapgroup`
- **ASAP_GROUP_KEY_ID**
  - The ASAP key ID of ASAP groups, all services in a ASAP group will have same ASAP_GROUP_KEY_ID
    The format is `<group-issuer>/<deploymentId>`.
  - Example: `micros-group/myasapgroup/4sdfjkn4098fjds`
- **ASAP_GROUP_PRIVATE_KEY**
  - ASAP group private key.
  - Example: `data:application/pkcs8;kid=micros-group%2Fmyasapgroup%2F4sdfjkn4098fjds;base64,<privatekeydata>`
- **ASAP_DEV_ISSUER**
  - Issuer to use in dev/staging for easier communication between services (see ASAP Testing Issuer below).
  - Example: `micros/dev`
- **ASAP_DEV_KEY_ID**
  - micros/dev/level2-lunch-bot-4sdfjkn4098fjds.
  - Example: `micros/dev`
- **ASAP_DEV_PRIVATE_KEY**
  - ASAP dev private key.
  - Example: `data:application/pkcs8;kid=micros%2Fdev%2Flevel2-lunch-bot-4sdfjkn4098fjds;base64,<privatekeydata>`

### ASAP Groups

Service owners can create an _AsapGroup_ to group their services. Each service in an ASAP group will have:

- An ASAP key, ASAP issuer and ASAP private key for the service
  - ASAP issuer: `micros/serviceId`
  - ASAP key id: `micros/serviceId/deploymentId`
  - ASAP private key: `data:application/pkcs8;kid=micros%2Flevel2-lunch-bot%2F4sdfjkn4098fjds;base64,<privatekeydata>`
- An ASAP group key, ASAP group issuer and ASAP group private key for ASAP group of the service
  - ASAP group issuer: `micros-group/asapGroupName`
  - ASAP group key id: `micros-group/asapGroupName/deploymentId`
  - ASAP group private key: `data:application/pkcs8;kid=micros-group%2Fmyasapgroup%2F4sdfjkn4098fjds;base64,<privatekeydata>`

When services are deployed, besides current ASAP\_\* environment variables, there will be three additional environment variables for the ASAP group key id (ASAP_GROUP_KEY_ID, ASAP group issuer (ASAP_GROUP_ISSUER) and ASAP group private key (ASAP_GROUP_PRIVATE_KEY) with values as above.

ASAP groups are created globally, but there is still strict separation between dev, staging, and production environments.

### ASAP Testing Issuer

In **non-production** environments (dev/staging), besides the current ASAP key/issuer — and the ASAP group key/issuer if the service is in an ASAP group — each service will have an extra ASAP testing key/issuer:

- ASAP dev issuer: `micros/dev`
- ASAP dev key id: `micros/dev/serviceId-deploymentId`
- ASAP dev private `key: data:application/pkcs8;kid=micros%2Fdev%2Flevel2-lunch-bot-4sdfjkn4098fjds;base64,<privatekeydata>`

When services are deployed, there will be 3 environment variables for ASAP dev key id (ASAP_DEV_KEY_ID), ASAP dev issuer (ASAP_DEV_ISSUER) and asap dev private key (ASAP_DEV_PRIVATE_KEY) with values as above.

## Alternatives

### Two Way Point-to-Point SSL / Client Cert

Pros:

- Simple, well understood and mature
- No implementation in actual resource service is needed, as long as direct network access is prohibited
- Authentication on Transport Layer (L4), instead of application level (mitigates risk of wrong implementation in authentication of actual app)

Cons:

- It's not currently possible to set this up using AWS Elastic Load Balancer (see <http://stackoverflow.com/questions/21245852/support-for-two-way-tls-https-with-elb).>
- Given our micro-services are behind ELBs which terminate the SSL connections the service itself wouldn't have access to the certificate to do the actual authentication of the Caller service. (<https://forums.aws.amazon.com/thread.jspa?messageID=555117).> Note however, ELB does support TCP forwarding so an EC2 hosted server can establish a two-way TLS/HTTPS connection.
- Non trivial effort required in maintaining Client / Server Certificates.

### OAuth 1.0a - 2LO/1LO

The OAuth 1.0 Two Legged authentication (also known as the 1LO - One Legged Auth) is the closest to the initial specification of Service to Service Authentication.

Pros:

- Supports secure message exchange over unencrypted, unsecure channel - without the overhead of SSL.
- This approach is mature and a well understood standard.
- Signed requests (including query params and body).
- Does not require secret sharing (supports).

Cons:

- Having the client generate signatures on every API request and validating them on the server for every request, proved to be cumbersome and error-prone.
- No separation between the token issuer (authority) and resource server.
- Although OAuth 1.0 is not formally deprecated and has unique characteristics that are not present in 2.0, the authors of OAuth 2.0 encourage the use of 2.0 in new implementations: "The OAuth 2.0 protocol is not backward compatible with OAuth 1.0. The two versions may co-exist on the network, and implementations may choose to support both. However, it is the intention of this specification that new implementations support OAuth 2.0 as specified in this document and that OAuth 1.0 is used only to support existing deployments." <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749>
- Requires nonce to be generated and verified.
- May not be easy to evolve it for future use cases.

### OAuth 2.0 - Client Credentials

Client Credentials is one of several grant types defined by OAuth 2.0. This grant type is the closest to the 2-legged OAuth 1.0a, thus also closest to the Service to Service Auth protocol. In contrast to the OAuth 1.0a two legged authentication flow, OAuth 2.0 requires an interaction with an Authorisation server that generates an access token to be used for accessing the Resource Server. The client credentials flow in OAuth 2.0 can be summarised as:

1. Client sends request for an access token with its client credentials to the Authorisation Server. The request can be encoded in JWT or other types such as SAML.
2. The Authorisation Server authenticates the client and validates its credentials, and if valid issues a Bearer type "Access Token". The Access Token can also be encoded in JWT (this is the case for ID token in OpenID connect protocol).
3. Client then requests access to the protected resource in Resource Server using the Access token.
4. Resource server validates the access token, and if valid returns the protected resource.

Step 4. is not clearly specified in OAuth 2.0 (beyond the scope of the specification), thus the token validation can be performed in various means e.g. within the resource server or delegated to an endpoint in the authorisation server.

Pros:

- Well understood standard that is widely adopted by major service providers such as Google and Facebook.
- Flexible framework that can be extended/integrated in many ways (e.g. SAML, JWT) and for different types of clients (browser/native/web application)
- Cleanly separated roles for scalability - Authorisation Server, Resource Owner, Client and Resource Server. (More relevant and useful in 3-legged OAuth)

Cons:

- Requires an Authorisation Server - that generates the access token to be used for accessing the Resource Server.
- The interaction with the Authorisation Server affects latency.
- One of the lead contributors to OAuth 2.0 has criticised the specification for its complexity/security concerns (oauth-2-0-and-the-road-to-hell and oauth-bearer-tokens-are-a-terrible-idea)

See also:

- OAuth 2.0 with JWT as bearer token <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-oauth-jwt-bearer-12>
- OAuth 2.0 Specification <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-4.4>

### Spotify crtauth

Reference: <https://github.com/spotify/crtauth/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md>

In this protocol, the server needs to have access to the user's public ssh key to authenticate using crtauth. Using that key, the server creates a challenge which is sent to the user for signing. The user then uses her private key to sign the challenge and sends the challenge back together with a signature. If the server can validate the signature and thereby prove the identity of the user it issues a token that can be used by the client to access protected resources.

```bash
    C                         S
     |                         |
(1)  | ----------------------> | > Request to protected resource
     |                         |
     | <---------------------- | < 401 Unauthorized
     |                         |
(2)  | ----------------------> | > GET: /_auth              (Challenge Request)
     |                         | > X-CHAP: request:<request>
     |                         |
(3)  | <---------------------- | < X-CHAP: challenge:<challenge>
     |                         |
(4)  | ----------------------> | > GET: /_auth              (Token Request)
     |                         | > X-CHAP: response:<response>
     |                         |
(5)  | <---------------------- | < X-CHAP: token:<token>
     |                         |   or: 403 Forbidden
     |                         |
     | ----------------------> | > Request to protected resource
     |                         | > Authorization: chap:<token>
     |                         |
(6)  | <---------------------- | < any HTTP Resource
     |                         | < or: 401 Unauthorized
```

### SAML

The Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) framework uses XML for representing security tokens and supports SSO, Federation, authentication and authorisation. SAML has no restriction on transport bindings, e.g. SOAP or JMS can be used. OAuth 2.0 has a SAML profile to use SAML Assertion (an XML security token) as an OAuth bearer token. SAML incurs extra overheads with SOAP binding and XML signature/encryption.

See Also:

- SAML Specification: <http://saml.xml.org/saml-specifications>
- OAuth Profile for SAML: <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-oauth-saml2-bearer-23>
- SAML support in CAS <http://jasig.github.io/cas/4.0.x/protocol/SAML-Protocol.html#saml-2-google-apps-integration>
- Relationship of JWTs to SAML Assertions: <http://self-issued.info/docs/draft-ietf-oauth-json-web-token.html#rfc.section.B>

### WS-Security and WS-\* Family

Web Services Security (WSS) is an extension to SOAP to apply end to end security to Web services. WS-Security adds significant complexity and overhead to SOAP processing due to the increased size of the message on the wire, verbose XML with several namespaces and cryptographic processing, requiring faster CPUs and more memory and bandwidth.

Reference: <https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc_home.php?wg_abbrev=wss>

### Kerberos

Kerberos is quite mature and built into many UNIX like and Windows operating systems. Kerberos supports single sign on, impersonation, delegation and mutual authentication (both client and server verify each other's identity). Kerberos supports symmetric key ciphers which can offer faster performance over public key ciphers. There is a large degree of similarity at the protocol design level and intended functions between Oauth 2.0 and Kerberos, as described in [IETF](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-hardjono-oauth-kerberos-01) draft in Kerberos profile for OAuth.

Kerberos requires a Key Distribution Center (KDC) to be always available for clients to authenticate. Since the KDC shares a symmetric key pair-wise with every client and server, the compromise of the KDC and the keys stored at the KDC renders the entire system compromised. It also has strict time requirements, which means the clocks of the involved hosts must be synchronized within configured limits.

Each network service which requires a different host name will need its own set of Kerberos keys. This complicates virtual hosting and clusters.

Kerberos cannot be used in scenarios where users want to connect to services from unknown/untrusted clients as in a typical Internet or cloud computer scenario, where the authentication provider typically does not have knowledge about the users client system.

See Also:

- RFC 4120: <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4120> and <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kerberos_%28protocol%29>
- OAuth 2.0 Support for Kerberos V5: <https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-hardjono-oauth-kerberos-01>

### Conclusion

The security landscape is filled with frameworks, specifications and standards. Thus it may seem there is no need for a custom protocol when there are so many to choose from. However, the context plays an important role here. Lightweight services deserve lightweight protocol. A secure protocol that is sufficiently lightweight but at the same time is extensible and can be easily evolved for future usage scenarios. To remain lightweight the service/protocol also needs to use a lightweight claims and payload representation without sacrificing security.

This context itself eliminates many of the heavy-weight, verbose players in this page - namely WS-\*, SAML, Kerberos. In addition, JWT has become the de facto standard for token representation and secure claims transfer. JWT has been used by major vendors and popular frameworks such as OpenId Connect, OAuth 2.0. Thus it makes sense to use a protocol that is based on JWT. In this sense, OAuth 2.0 is a good candidate that has well defined integration with JWT. However, there is no one legged flow in OAuth 2.0, and the two legged flow requires an Authorisation Server and endpoint, making implementation effort non-trivial. It may well be that an Authorisation/Token Server will be deemed necessary in a future usecase for service to service authentication, however it would be preferable to start without one and evolve the protocol when it becomes a necessity. When that happens, it may be worthwhile to consider evolving to OAuth 2.0 protocol, as it provides pathways for many other features and enables other usecases. In this light, the specification for such a protocol must also be carefully designed so that its core doesn't contradict with OAuth specification.

Thus it makes sense to build a lightweight protocol for service to service authentication that leverages JWT and can be extended and evolved for future usecases.

### Libraries links

- <https://bitbucket.org/atlassianlabs/httplease-asap/src/master/>
- <https://bitbucket.org/atlassian/go-asap/src/master/>
- <https://bitbucket.org/atlassianlabs/rust-asap/src/master/>
- <https://bitbucket.org/atlassian-marketplace/haskell-asap/src/master/>
